12, 11, 10, 9, we have this ignition sequence start.
[Music.]
5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0. All engines running. Liftoff!
In the training section,
the Apollo, Saturn V, the Apollo, Saturn V, the Apollo, Saturn V, For the lunar
landing, the Apollo Saturn V configuration consisted of two basic sections. The
Saturn V booster for Earth launch and departure to the Moon, and a lunar flight
system for operations at the Moon. The lunar flight system consisted of two
modules, one for lunar orbit operations and Earth return, the command and
service module, and the other for lunar landing and launch, the lunar module.
The lunar module consisted of two stages, the descent stage for the landing and
the ascent stage for the launch and rendezvous with the command and service
modules. The lunar flight system was injected into a translunar trajectory by
the final stage of the Saturn booster. Upon arrival at the Moon, the command
module inserted the combined vehicles into a circular orbit which passed over
the landing site at an altitude of 60 nautical miles. Prior to landing, two
astronauts transferred from the command module to the lunar module, the third
remained in the command module. The lunar module then separated from the command
module, and at the appropriate point in the lunar orbit, initiated the powered
descent maneuver, using the main engine on the descent stage. The approach phase
of the lunar module power descent begins at a point, or high gate, above and
approaching the landing point where the pilot has visual contact with the
landing area. When the lunar module arrives at low gate, approximately 200
meters altitude, it pitches forward to a near vertical descent during which the
pilot takes over from the automatic control for the final touchdown. The time
from low gate to touchdown is nominally about two minutes. The planetary landing
vehicle is designed to replace the Lunar Module for delivery of very small
payloads to a planetary surface. The PLV consists of two stages originally
developed by the Department of Defense for Ballistic Missile Defense. This
direct conversion of Department of Defense technology to space exploration is
enabled by the almost identical energy requirements of a lunar landing by the
Lunar Module and a space-based missile intercept by DOD kinetic kill vehicle
KKV. This fortuitous analogy of equivalent energy capabilities enables the
flight profile of the KKV PLV to overlay the flight profile of the Lunar module
with only minor adjustments to the KKV flight profile. The descent stage of the
two-stage PLV is separated at LOGATE where the PLV landing stage is ignited for
the final vertical descent-in-landing. The descent stage proceeds off-range for
disposal. The final phase of landing and touchdown by a PLV was verified in an
actual flight demonstration using a modified KKV test vehicle. This Advanced
Concept Architecture Test, or ACAT, was conducted at the Air Force Phillips
Laboratory National Hover Test Facility on September 1, 1993.
Kinetic vehicles, or KVs, are the backbone of Rocketdyne's kinetic energy
weapons program. A requirement exists to develop this defense system to protect
America's assets from a potential foreign threat. A KV is a unique defensive
weapon in that it can destroy a threat through impact alone. This is achieved at
very high velocities. Essentially, it's a smart, self-propelled bullet with its
own logic. And since the KV carries no warhead, we've been able to keep it small
in size. A major milestone in KV technology was achieved in July 1990 when
Rocketdyne successfully hovered its Advanced Hover Interceptor Test, or A-HIT,
vehicle. It marked the first flight of a lightweight, 38-pound, fully-autonomous
KV. A Hit not only flew its mission, but acquired and locked on to a target
without any commands from ground control. Up until now, this had never before
been achieved. The test demonstrated the capability of a fully integrated
vehicle, including all necessary subsystems required for KV operation.
Rocketdyne now has a fully functional autonomous vehicle whose size is ideally
suited for current and future DoD programs, like the ground-based interceptor,
or GBI, and brilliant pebbles. This technology also applies to other spin-off
programs currently under consideration. Through our recent AHIT test success,
we've been able to prove that the KV attitude control system is capable of
maintaining the kind of stability required in order to intercept an actual
moving target in space. This kind of control is essential to an operational
system. At the same time, we've demonstrated the ability of the visible seeker
to acquire and track a target under actual flight conditions, and it only weighs
5 pounds. In an effort to reduce potential risk associated with the hover
flight, we performed a series of attitude control tests in advance on the
vehicle. They were the first in a series of tests involving the integration of
several subsystems into one. The vehicle was balanced on a pivot while a
disturbance was introduced. Using its pre-programmed logic, the vehicle quickly
recovered its initial position. The A-hit static test demonstrated a hot-fire
strap-down test of a full-up, lightweight propulsion system. All systems
operated properly, and all test objectives were met. This was the exact
propulsion system that was used to control the hover vehicle's trajectory and
position during flight. The result of all these tests represents a whole new
generation of hover vehicles. Rocketdyne has gone from a 220-pound vehicle known
as On-Target to our 38-pound A-Hit vehicle in less than a year. We fabricated
and fully integrated the vehicle with several major subsystems. These include
the seeker, the image processor, avionics, telemetry, and the propulsion system.
To convert the A-Hit hover test vehicle directly to a planetary landing test
vehicle, only three relatively minor modifications were required. First, the
avionics guidance laws were changed to enable the AHIT to perform a precisely
controlled descent from its hover position. Second, legs were added for the
landing touchdown. Third, the AHIT Seeker hardware was replaced with a payload
compartment and small surface payload. Using the modified AHIT vehicle, the ACAT
flight demonstration on September 1, 1993 included the complete sequence of a a
controlled descent from hover using the vertical divert engine, be touchdown at
a landing point well within the capabilities of the lightweight legs, and c,
ejection of the service payload. The Ulysses mission is designed to conform
precisely to Apollo. The Ulysses designed reference mission is based on the use
of a standard Titan II space launch vehicle to carry a cargo comparable to the
Apollo command module and lunar module vehicles the command module is replaced
by a lunar service vehicle for lunar orbit insertion and lunar orbit operations
the lunar module is replaced by the planetary landing vehicle two of which can
be launched by a single titan 2 the Ulysses lunar orbit configuration just as
Apollo consists of an orbiting vehicle and a landing vehicle two in the case of
the Ulysses design reference mission the The orbiting lunar service vehicle is a
conventional small satellite used for lunar orbit insertion and after departure
of the PLVs, communications relay from the lunar surface to the Earth. Each
planetary landing vehicle is comprised of a two-stage KKV, in which the second
stage carries the surface payloads. Similar to the KKV concept, the first stage
of the PLV or Descent stage provides the high energy portion of the flight
profile. The PLV Descent Stage consists of an unmodified advanced liquid axial
stage, or ALAS, a lightweight, low-cost liquid propulsion system. The PLV
landing stage is comprised of a modified lightweight exo-atmospheric projectile,
or LEAP, and a payload system for deployment of specific planetary surface
exploration instruments. The LEAP is a flight-qualified, fully integrated
autonomous spacecraft having been demonstrated on several DoD KKV space test
missions. The LEAP is a derivative of the AHIT hover test vehicle. The landing
stage payload system consists of four similar payload modules, each of which
contains a separate surface instrument or device. The designated scientific
instrument for the Ulysses design reference mission is the autonomous Grendel
micro rover. The Grendel is an artificially intelligent six-legged walker
derived from three generations of predecessor mini-robots. A flight-type Grendel
will weigh about 5 and a half pounds. In its stowed configuration, it is
slightly larger than a soft drink can. The behavior control software enables the
Grendel to operate autonomously for extended periods performing a variety of
functions in response to its surroundings, scientific objectives, health status,
and other mission requirements. This adaptable micro-rover can be equipped with
a variety of exploration devices, including recently developed superhuman micro
sensors. For transport and landing, the Grendel is housed in a landing capsule,
or cocoon. This cocoon absorbs the landing impact and enables deployment of the
micro rovers onto almost any surface conditions. The Ulysses mission begins just
as Apollo, from a low Earth orbit transition to lunar orbit. However, because a
pre-return trajectory is not necessary, an optimum performance or minimum energy
five-day transfer is utilized. The Titan II launch vehicle was selected after a
series of trade-offs as a balance among cost, launch capability, and overall
mission performance margins to maximize the probability of success. Again, just
as Apollo, lunar orbit insertion is performed by the Command Service Module
equivalent lunar service vehicle, a contemporary small satellite. At specified
points in lunar orbit and depending on selected landing sites, each of the two
PLVs performs an Apollo-type descent and landing. A lunar service vehicle
remains active in lunar orbit, functioning primarily as a data storage and
communications relay between the surface stations and the Earth. Landing sites
on both the near side and the far side of the moon and located at any latitude
can be addressed on a single Ulysses-type mission. It should be noted that the
Ulysses flight system and flight profile can be applied to almost any planetary
body, including Mars, Saturn's moon Titan, and asteroids. As previously
illustrated, the PLV approach and landing follows almost exactly the fight
profile demonstrated on each of the six Apollo landings. The ALAS descent stage
performs the higher energy braking phase, which is terminated at the low gate
step, approximately 200 meters, or about 660 feet above the lunar surface. At
this low gate step, the ALAS is separated to continue downrange for disposal,
and the leap landing stage is ignited to proceed in a near vertical descent to a
hover position above the landing point. Again, it should be noted that the
amount of propulsion energy required for the alas descent stage for the braking
phase of an Apollo-type descent profile is almost identical to the propulsion
energy required for a KKV intercept trajectory. Similarly, the amount of
propulsion energy required for the leap landing stage from low gate to touchdown
is almost identical to that required during the tracking and intercept phase of
a KKV flight profile. This conveniently facilitates the conversion of DOD
-developed KKV configuration to a planetary landing configuration that is ideal
for many types of planetary exploration missions. As the leap landing stage
approaches the surface, it enters a precisely controlled vertical descent to the
landing point. After touchdown, each of the four payload modules ejects its
cocoon onto the surface. After the cocoon opens, Grendel walks away to commence
its exploration activities. This final phase of leap landing and micro rover
deployment was demonstrated during the Advanced Concept Architecture Test, or
ACAT, at Phillips Laboratory on September 1, 1993. The flight demonstration of
the modified AHIT test vehicle included a translation maneuver to a hover
position directly above the landing point and a controlled descent to landing.
The AHIT vehicle included a single prototype cocoon and Grendel. The following
is a real-time ACAT flight video that was extracted from official video data
recording, including the control room test conductor's voice loop. Vehicle
pressure and temperature are nominal and holding. This is land or launch
control. We're at T-minus 39 seconds and counting.
instrumentation initiate the auto sequence T-minus 30
T-minus 25 24, 23, 22, 21 20, 19, 18, 17 16, 15, 14 13, 12, 11 Avionics away. 8.
7. 6. 5. 4. ECT received. 3. 2. 1. 0. Plus 1. Plus 2. Plus 3. Plus 4. Plus 5.
Plus 6. Plus 7. Plus 8. Plus 9. Plus 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
Yeah. In the flight. Normal in the flight. T-plus 20. Ten seconds after a cocoon
ejection, the Grendel opens and proceeds on its mission. GS. Yeah. GS, RF
output, off, please. Yeah! Hooray! Yeah! All right! Yeah! Okay,
we are standing by for completion of rover mission. instrumentation. Mark, you
can turn the flight data tape recorder on, please. The current demonstration
model includes whiskers for obstacle avoidance, an onboard TV camera, and an IR
sensor for object detection and location.
D plus 100. Mark, visitor conference room, amplifier switch to off, please. Good
job, Craig.
The window insert in the upper left of the screen will present the rover's eye
view of its surroundings and path ahead.
[Chatter.]
3, 2, 1, ignition.
Lift off. Quiet on to me.
Gemini 8 goes into the clouds, high above Cape Kennedy.
[Music.]